Create serverless architecture design blog post (#3567)
pulumi/pulumi-hugo: themes/default/content/blog/serverless-architecture-design/index.md

date: 2023-10-30T20:40:47Z
draft: false
meta_desc: "Learn about the concept of serverless architecture and how to use Pulumi and Go to create your Azure serverless application"
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - adora-nwodo
tags:
    - serverless

---

Serverless architectures have gained more popularity in the recent years because they make it easier for software developers to focus on application development without the additional operation overhead. With Pulumi, you can deploy and manage your serverless infrastructure and this article shows you how to do this with Azure.

Before we go into the specifics of serverless architecture design with Pulumi on azure, let's go
through the basics of serverless - this is important for the rest of the article.

## What is Serverless Architecture

Serverless architecture is a cloud computing model that simplifies the management of infrastructure. This allows software developers to focus on writing code without worrying
about server provisioning, scaling or maintenance. The idea behind it is functions as a service (FaaS), in which the environment dynamically scales in response to demand and code is executed in response to events.

> Key characteristics of serverless architecture include:

Reviewer: its missing a fundamental piece which is "no operations to manage, so no security or firewalls to set. no operating system patching. none of that

- Event-Driven: Serverless functions are triggered by events in the system. These events could be HTTP requests, messages in a queue, or changes to a data store.

- Auto-Scaling: With serverless, resources automatically scale up or down to match the workload so you don't use infrastructure beyond what you actually need.

- Pay-as-You-Go: You are charged only for the actual compute resources you use during code execution.

> ## Requirements

Reviewer 2: Change to "Prerequisites"

> ## Requirements

Reviewer: I really don't care for this requirements section. this is more for a tutorial and less for a blog post

To follow along with this article, here are some things you might need:

- [Pulumi CLI](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/install/)

- [Pulumi account and access token](https://app.pulumi.com/signup)

- [Go](https://go.dev/doc/install)

- [Git CLI](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)

- [Az CLI](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli)

Now that you have everything needed to get started, let's see our serverless application written in Go and deployed using Pulumi.

> ### 1. Clone the repo and setup your project

Reviewer: we are missing an entire section talking about what we are building here. we are just somehow jumping into doing an example. the reader has no idea what they are actually building when following your instructions. 

we should have an arch diagram. we should have and explanation of all the pieces. 

we are also missing an entire section about why any of these stuff is hard and how does Pulumi help. why should they use Pulumi versus whatever their previous workflow is?

The first thing we need to do is clone the repository from GitHub and setup the project. The serverless code can be found in [this repo](https://github.com/AdoraNwodo/serverless-pulumi-go).

```bash
# Clone the repository and cd to the infra directory
git clone https://github.com/AdoraNwodo/serverless-pulumi-go.git

# Install go dependencies (for pulumi infra)
go mod download

# Install go dependencies (for serverless function)
cd app && go mod download
```

### 2. Login to Pulumi Cloud and initialize stack

Next, let's setup our state in Pulumi Cloud.

```bash
# You can store Pulumi state in multiple ways, here we use Pulumi Cloud
# Other state backends include Azure storage, Amazon S3, local file, and more
pulumi login

# Initialize your stack
# Here we name the stack "dev"
pulumi stack init --stack dev
```

### 3. Deploy to Azure

Now, you're set up to deploy your Serverless app to Azure.

```bash
# Finally, run `pulumi up` to deploy!
pulumi up
```

### 4. Interact with your function

> Once your web app is running, you can visit the static website that calls the functions at `https://{vcl_project_name}.vercel.app`, click the different buttons that call the different functions and see the response in real-time!

Reviewer: I think this is from a previous post

---
title: "Modern Serverless Architecture Design"
date: 2023-11-03
draft: false
meta_desc: "Learn about the concept of serverless architecture and the different considerations to make when building out your serverless application."
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - adora-nwodo
tags:
    - serverless
    - serverless-functions
    - system-design
    - system-architecture

---

> Serverless architectures have become popular because they make it easier for software developers to focus on application development without the additional operation overhead. With Pulumi, you can deploy and manage your serverless infrastructure and this article shows you different architectural design considerations for your serverless application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serverless architectures are popular because they make it easier for software developers to focus on application development without additional operation overhead. With Pulumi, you can deploy and manage your serverless infrastructure, and this article shows you different architectural design considerations for your serverless application.
```

Its already a present fact.

Using serverless eliminates the responsibilities of operational management, which streamlines the development process. This means you don't have to set up complex security mechanisms or firewalls. In addition, serverless computing abstracts away all operational complexities, saving you from the complexities of operating system patching and guaranteeing a simplified and trouble-free development process.

Key characteristics of serverless architecture include:

- Event-Driven: Serverless functions are triggered by events in the system. These events could be HTTP requests, messages in a queue, or changes to a data store.

- Auto-Scaling: With serverless, resources automatically scale up or down to match the workload so you don't use infrastructure beyond what you actually need.

- Pay-as-You-Go: You are charged only for the actual compute resources you use during code execution.

The serverless architecture model is in line with current tech trends such as cloud-native development and DevOps, by allowing developers to focus on code development and pushing faster releases.

> ## Serverless Function Design

Reviewer: Is there code somewhere? like does it work and can you follow along with it and deploy it?

The design of the serverless function is important for the success of your application. When mapping out the architectural design for your serverless function, you should consider some of the following:

> - **Function Logic**: A serverless function should have a well-defined purpose and focus on a specific task. If a function has multiple responsibilities, consider breaking it into smaller, more focused functions. In the same code shown below, we have two functions `date` and `weather` and it is clear what their responsibilities are.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Use well-defined and focused functions**: A serverless function should have a well-defined purpose and focus on a specific task. If a function has multiple responsibilities, consider breaking it into smaller, more focused functions. In the same code shown below, we have two functions `date` and `weather` and it is clear what their responsibilities are.
```

Reviewer: Yes, I was just about to comment this

    ``` go
    // The 'date' function that returns the current date
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/date", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*")
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET")

		if r.Method == http.MethodOptions {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNoContent)
			return
		}

		w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
		w.Write([]byte(fmt.Sprintf(`{ "now": %d }`, time.Now().UnixNano()/1000000)))
	})

    // The 'weather' function that returns the weather
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/weather", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*")
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET")

		if r.Method == http.MethodOptions {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNoContent)
			return
		}

		weather := getWeatherData()

		// Convert the weather data to JSON.
		responseJSON, err := json.Marshal(weather)
		if err != nil {
			http.Error(w, "Error encoding response to JSON", http.StatusInternalServerError)
			return
		}

		w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
		w.Write(responseJSON)
	})
    ```

> - **Statelessness**: Serverless functions should be stateless. This encourages scalability and fault tolerance since every serverless function call should be able to function on its own, regardless of previous or subsequent calls. The recommended practise for managing data that has to be persistent beyond the span of one function execution is to store it externally in reliable data storage systems like object stores or databases. In doing so, serverless applications maintain the clear separation between function logic and stateful data management while guaranteeing data durability, consistency, and adaptability to changing workloads. The stateless nature of HTTP is an important aspect that makes serverless computing a good fit for many HTTP-based use cases. In a stateless protocol like HTTP, each request from a client to a server is treated independently, with no connection or context maintained between requests. This aligns well with the design philosophy of serverless computing, where each function execution is isolated and stateless Serverless platforms are designed to handle short-lived, stateless functions that respond to individual HTTP requests, making them well-suited for web applications, microservices, and API endpoints.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Embrace statelessness**: Serverless functions should be stateless. This encourages scalability and fault tolerance since every serverless function call should be able to function on its own, regardless of previous or subsequent calls. The recommended practise for managing data that has to be persistent beyond the span of one function execution is to store it externally in reliable data storage systems like object stores or databases (see the diagram below). In doing so, serverless applications maintain the clear separation between function logic and stateful data management while guaranteeing data durability, consistency, and adaptability to changing workloads. The stateless nature of HTTP is an important aspect that makes serverless computing a good fit for many HTTP-based use cases. In a stateless protocol like HTTP, each request from a client to a server is treated independently, with no connection or context maintained between requests. This aligns well with the design philosophy of serverless computing, where each function execution is isolated and stateless Serverless platforms are designed to handle short-lived, stateless functions that respond to individual HTTP requests, making them well-suited for web applications, microservices, and API endpoints.
```

Reviewer: `stateless Serverless platforms`

is Serverless supposed to be capitalized?

> Figure 1. Resources needed in a serverless architecture
![serverless-resources](./serverless-resources.png)

> - **Function triggers**: When dealing with serverless functions you should choose the Right trigger that best suits your use case. Common triggers include HTTP requests, message queues, database changes, and timers. In our application, we used an HTTP trigger for our two functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Choose the right trigger**: When dealing with serverless functions you should choose the right trigger that best suits your use case. Common triggers include HTTP requests, message queues, database changes, and timers. In our application, we used an HTTP trigger for our two functions.
```

Reviewer: I don't get this bullet. Its not so much choosing the right trigger but choosing the right manner to transfer data. The data source determines the event which determines the trigger.

Reviewer: You are basically saying you should choose event-driven versus synchronous / poll-based architectures?

Maybe you are saying choose event-driven or poll-based based on your use case right? If that is the case, perhaps you need to update the text a bit

Reviewer 3: > If you're building something that is dependent on DB changes, one might think it makes sense to make a http triggered function and check if the db has changed at the start of the function, but a cosmosdb triggered function (speaking in the context if Azure) makes more sense.
**This** is the sort of content/recommendation that should be in the article, IMO.

    ``` go
    // The 'date' function that returns the current date
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/date", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        ...
	})

    // The 'weather' function that returns the weather
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/weather", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        ...
	})
    ```

> - **Scalability**: Serverless doesn't mean "no server" otherwise, where will the code actually run? The meaning of serverless is "less server." When event density rises, the majority of serverless platforms offer a set of options to manage how the infrastructure should scale. There are several options available to you, and the technique you use will depend on the function. Serverless Functions offer auto-scaling, allowing your application to seamlessly handle increased workloads.  By designing your serverless functions with scalability in mind, you can maintain optimal performance even during traffic spikes, delivering a responsive and reliable experience to your users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Design with scalability in mind**: Serverless doesn't mean "no server" otherwise, where will the code actually run? The meaning of serverless is "less server." When event density rises, the majority of serverless platforms offer a set of options to manage how the infrastructure should scale. There are several options available to you, and the technique you use will depend on the function. Serverless Functions offer auto-scaling, allowing your application to seamlessly handle increased workloads.  By designing your serverless functions with scalability in mind, you can maintain optimal performance even during traffic spikes, delivering a responsive and reliable experience to your users.
```

Reviewer: I am afraid this section still doesn't make sense. What are the several options available? What is the scaling technique you are referring to? You say in the next sentence that the functions have auto-scaling which allows it seamlessly handle increased workloads. 

Like the whole point is you can design serverless functions that already have scalability built in. So what does designing with scalability in mind mean in this case?

- **Avoid making direct cross-service references**: In your serverless architecture, there are times when functions depend on other functions. This typically happens a lot in distributed systems. For example in an e-commerce service, the checkout function could depend on the payment function. However, it's advised that services avoid making direct references to one another in order to prevent hard coupling that can cause issues later. A significant amount of reworking may be required if direct references for a service need to be changed. Using message services, such as queues or topics, to facilitate service-to-service communication is a good way to handle this. This decoupling enhances flexibility, scalability, and resilience, as well as simplifies testing and debugging. It also promotes security by allowing access control. When you use a more decoupled architecture, serverless systems can evolve independently and adapt to changing requirements, making them more robust and maintainable over time.

> To create serverless infrastructure for an application that should have distint function logic, statelessness, message queue triggers, auto scaling, and service to service communication, you can identify all the cloud resources needed for your infrastructure and use Pulumi to declare and manage those resources. The interesting thing about Pulumi's code-driven infrastructure provisioning is that you can manage all your serverless infrastructure in one place which makes development faster, and treating IaC code like regular code also gives you the ability to track changes to infrastructure over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create serverless infrastructure for an application that should have distinct function logic, statelessness, message queue triggers, auto scaling, and service to service communication, you can identify all the cloud resources needed for your infrastructure and use Pulumi to declare and manage those resources. The interesting thing about Pulumi's code-driven infrastructure provisioning is that you can manage all your serverless infrastructure in one place which makes development faster, and treating IaC code like regular code also gives you the ability to track changes to infrastructure over time.
```

be careful of typos

---
title: "Modern Serverless Architecture Design"
date: 2023-11-03
draft: false
meta_desc: "Learn about the concept of serverless architecture and the different considerations to make when building out your serverless application."
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - adora-nwodo
tags:
    - serverless
    - serverless-functions
    - azure-functions
    - system-design
    - system-architecture

---

> Serverless architectures have become popular because they make it easier for software developers to focus on application development without the additional operation overhead. With Pulumi, you can deploy and manage your serverless infrastructure and this article shows you how to do this with Azure.

Reviewer 3: Seems like we need to rewrite a good portion of this paragraph, since the focus of the article is now architectural/design recommendations and not how to deploy on Azure.

> Before we go into the specifics of serverless architecture design with Pulumi on azure, let's go

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before we go into the specifics of serverless architecture design, let's go
```

through the basics of serverless - this is important for the rest of the article.

## What is Serverless Architecture

> Serverless architecture is a cloud computing model that simplifies the management of infrastructure. This allows software developers to focus on writing code without worrying about server provisioning, scaling or maintenance. The idea behind it is functions as a service (FaaS), in which the environment dynamically scales in response to demand and code is executed in response to events. In the serverless architecture, developers focus on writing and deploying code in the form of serverless functions, which are executed in response to specific events or triggers.

Reviewer 3: You mention FaaS here, but can we also make connections/comparisons with things like event-driven architectures? That seems relevant, but perhaps I'm mistaken. I think it would also be helpful to mention specific product offerings here---what are the serverless offerings from AWS? From Azure? From Google Cloud?

Reviewer 3: As for event-driven, you do mention that serverless/FaaS _is_ event-driven. Here, I was thinking of you explaining/mentioning "event-driven architecture (EDA)" since it is a term that lots of folks run into/see. Is it the same as serverless? (Not necessarily. Serverless is EDA, but not all EDA is serverless.) It doesn't need to be a lot, but enough to help folks understand some of the different pieces involved.

> Using serverless eliminates the responsibilities of operational management, which streamlines the development process. This means you don;t have to set up complex security mechanisms or firewalls. In addition, serverless computing abstracts away all operational complexities, saving you from the complexities of operating system patching and guaranteeing a simplified and trouble-free development process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using serverless eliminates the responsibilities of operational management, which streamlines the development process. This means you don't have to set up complex security mechanisms or firewalls. In addition, serverless computing abstracts away all operational complexities, saving you from the complexities of operating system patching and guaranteeing a simplified and trouble-free development process.
```

Key characteristics of serverless architecture include:

> - Event-Driven: Serverless functions are triggered by events in the system. These events could be HTTP requests, messages in a queue, or changes to a data store.

Reviewer 3: OK, so I see the mention of event-driven here, but my earlier comment about a comparison/contrast of serverless to event-driven architectures still stands. Is this the same thing? Is it different?

- Auto-Scaling: With serverless, resources automatically scale up or down to match the workload so you don't use infrastructure beyond what you actually need.

- Pay-as-You-Go: You are charged only for the actual compute resources you use during code execution.

The serverless architecture model is in line with current tech trends such as cloud-native development and DevOps, by allowing developers to focus on code development and pushing faster releases.

## Serverless Function Design

> The design of the serverless function is important for the success of your application. When mapping out the architectural design for your Azure function, you should consider some of the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The design of the serverless function is important for the success of your application. When mapping out the architectural design for your function, you should consider some of the following:
```

- **Function Logic**: A serverless function should have a well-defined purpose and focus on a specific task. If a function has multiple responsibilities, consider breaking it into smaller, more focused functions. In the serverless app we deployed using Pulumi, we had two functions `date` and `weather` and it is clear what their responsibilities are.

>     ``` go

Reviewer 3: I note that this example shows dealing with HTTP requests and responses. Is it worthwhile to mention something about serverless being ideally well suited for this sort of use case?

    // The 'date' function that returns the current date
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/date", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*")
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET")

		if r.Method == http.MethodOptions {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNoContent)
			return
		}

		w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
		w.Write([]byte(fmt.Sprintf(`{ "now": %d }`, time.Now().UnixNano()/1000000)))
	})

    // The 'weather' function that returns the weather
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/weather", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*")
		w.Header().Set("Access-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET")

		if r.Method == http.MethodOptions {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNoContent)
			return
		}

		weather := getWeatherData()

		// Convert the weather data to JSON.
		responseJSON, err := json.Marshal(weather)
		if err != nil {
			http.Error(w, "Error encoding response to JSON", http.StatusInternalServerError)
			return
		}

		w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
		w.Write(responseJSON)
	})
    ```

> - **Statelessness**: Serverless functions should be stateless. This encourages scalability and fault tolerance since every serverless function call should be able to function on its own, regardless of previous or subsequent calls. The recommended practise for managing data that has to be persistent beyond the span of one function execution is to store it externally in reliable data storage systems like object stores or databases. In doing so, serverless applications maintain the clear separation between function logic and stateful data management while guaranteeing data durability, consistency, and adaptability to changing workloads.

Reviewer 3: Given that HTTP is (generally speaking) a stateless protocol, perhaps here is where the mention of serverless as a good fit for HTTP-based use cases would fit?

- **Function triggers**: When dealing with serverless functions you should choose the Right trigger that best suits your use case. Common triggers include HTTP requests, message queues, database changes, and timers. In our application, we used an HTTP trigger for our two functions.

    ``` go
    // The 'date' function that returns the current date
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/date", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        ...
	})

    // The 'weather' function that returns the weather
	mux.HandleFunc("/api/weather", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        ...
	})
    ```

>     To set the trigger in your serverless function, navigate to your `function.json` configuration and set the `type` parameter in the `bindings` object.

Reviewer 3: This is specific to a particular provider, is it not? We should call out the provider (Azure or AWS or GCP or whoever).

Reviewer 3: Right, I completely understand. As the article stands now, however, it's not Azure-specific, and therefore if we are including Azure-specific pieces we should alert the reader that this is particular to Azure (and not to all serverless implementations in general).

Reviewer 3: @AdoraNwodo This is still something that needs to be addressed (I also left another comment in the latest review).

    ``` json
    "bindings": [
        {
            "authLevel": "Anonymous",
            "type": "httpTrigger",
            "direction": "in",
            "name": "req",
        "methods": [
            "get"
        ]
        },
        {
            "type": "http",
            "direction": "out",
            "name": "res"
        }
    ]

    ```

- **Scalability**: Serverless doesn't mean "no server" otherwise, where will the code actually run? The meaning of serverless is "less server." When event density rises, the majority of serverless platforms offer a set of options to manage how the infrastructure should scale. There are several options available to you, and the technique you use will depend on the function. Azure Functions offer auto-scaling, allowing your application to seamlessly handle increased workloads.  By designing your serverless functions with scalability in mind, you can maintain optimal performance even during traffic spikes, delivering a responsive and reliable experience to your users.

> - **Dependency across multiple services**: In your serverless architecture, there are times when functions depend on other functions. This typically happens a lot in distributed systems. For example in an e-commerce service, the checkout function could depend on the payment function. However, it's advised that services avoid making direct references to one another in order to prevent hard coupling that can cause issues later. A significant amount of reworking may be required if direct references for a service need to be changed. Using message services, such as queues or topics, to facilitate service-to-service communication is a good way to handle this.

Reviewer 3: You're sort of "burying" the recommendation/consideration here. Think about changing "Dependency across multiple services" to something like "Avoid making direct cross-service references" or something similar, and then in the text explain why (and what the solutions are).

> Figure 1. Resources needed in a serverless architecture
![serverless-resources](./serverless-resources.png)

To create serverless infrastructure for an application that should have distint function logic, statelessness, message queue triggers, auto scaling, and service to service communication, you can identify all the cloud resources needed for your infrastructure and use Pulumi to declare and manage those resources. The interesting thing about Pulumi's code-driven infrastructure provisioning is that you can manage all your serverless infrastructure in one place which makes development faster, and treating IaC code like regular code also gives you the ability to track changes to infrastructure over time.

> If you've joined us on this incredible journey to lean about serverless applications with Pulumi and Azure, we'd love to hear your story. How did it work out for you?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you've joined us on this incredible journey to learn about serverless applications, we'd love to hear your story. How did it work out for you?
```

Reviewer: "incredible journey", the voice is a bit off from how we want to speak with our customer. it needs to be a bit more down to earth.

> Our journey doesn't end here; there's a lot more you can do with serverless apps when you throw Pulumi into the mix. We invite you to share your thoughts, ideas, and suggestions, and we can't wait to see what you build!

Reviewer 3: Like what? Throw out some teasers, build some excitement!

> Figure 1. Resources needed in a serverless architecture
![serverless-resources](./serverless-resources.png)

To create serverless infrastructure for an application that should have distint function logic, statelessness, message queue triggers, auto scaling, and service to service communication, you can identify all the cloud resources needed for your infrastructure and use Pulumi to declare and manage those resources. The interesting thing about Pulumi's code-driven infrastructure provisioning is that you can manage all your serverless infrastructure in one place which makes development faster, and treating IaC code like regular code also gives you the ability to track changes to infrastructure over time.

> To learn more about using Pulumi to deploy serverless applications, check out this [blog post](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/easy-serverless-apps-and-infrastructure-real-events-real-code/) written by Joe Duffy.

Reviewer 3: Are there other blog posts that make sense to reference, besides just Joe's post? What about serverless resources from other web sites?
